bravery courage defiance heartbreak
they're not normally words you'd attach
to Father's Day but Sunday the second of
September 1984 was a Father's Day like
no other not before and thankfully not
since it was the day two rival biker
gangs went to war in the carpark of a
Sydney pub leaving dozens of people
wounded and seven dead including an
innocent fifteen-year-old girl
the notorious Mill para Massacre remains
the worst single outbreak of bikie
violence the world has ever seen
this Father's Day marks 30 years since
that bloodbath stunned Australia the
images are sometimes violent and
confronting because you're about to see
and hear compelling first-hand accounts
of what really happened that day
Jah cross is a hard man one of
Australia's most feared by key bosses
he's been shot beaten within an inch of
death
and jailed for murder he's now 71 a
grandfather
defiantly alive and defiantly defensive
to this day of his infamous role in the
1984 mill para massacre
you'd let this feud this war spill out
publicly no I didn't they can't hear us
get it right they came to us it's
Father's Day September 2nd quiet
afternoon in the carpark of a Western
Sydney Punk war erupts between two bikie
gangs jocks
Comancheros and sworn enemies the
Bandidos
when the last shots fired the guns
smoked car park is littered with wounded
and bleeding bikers six of their
brothers in arms' lie dead as well as an
innocent fifteen-year-old girl I can see
an hour she probably be smart smiling at
me for doing this for her it's now 30
years since that shocking day it was
absolutely unbelievable
in terms of bikie history there's never
been anything like it since and there
was never anything like it before
tonight inside the massacre as never
told before the crucial witness I
thought I'm not going to let them get
away with this whose to fight decades of
death threats breaks this life they're
all making gestures like that screaming
put your throat slitting the throat
for the first time a grieving father
reveals 30 years of anguish it's just I
can imagine what she looked like on that
day the detectives passed with
Australia's biggest ever Criminal
Investigation unveil evidence never
released to the public should be her
blood on his hands today pavlova and the
notorious pikey boss himself in his
first ever in-depth in Division chalk 30
years on what responsibility will blame
do you wear for the military massacre
[Music]
Jacque Ross still lives to ride he's now
retired but for three decades he was the
formidable leader of the Comancheros the
biker gang he founded to this day
Jacque where's the club colors with
pride when you wear those commentary
colors what feeling does that give you
well you know one that's the thread that
binds everyone together that gives
everyone that identity that identity
that tribal loyalty he would give rise
to a spiral of violence and Linda Martin
would get caught in the middle and like
so many of the innocent bystanders that
day have had their lives shaped by the
biker gangs who went to war at Mill para
what I saw were deliberate actions they
went they're armed they knew what was
going to happen they were waiting for it
to happen they could hardly be surprised
when it did happen and the innocent
people like yourself got caught up in
their war many many innocent people
from a dirt-poor strict childhood in the
slums of Glasgow Jacques Ross learned to
fight and survive at an early age in
1967 The Scotsman emigrated to Australia
having served six years in the British
Army clearing landmines in northern
Africa and Asia what values did your
military career teach you mates machete
so one thing you learned as a soldier
you met in truth jock never stopped
being a soldier he missed the discipline
the camaraderie Harley Davidson
motorbikes were his other passion so on
the New South Wales Central Coast in the
late 60s the Comancheros were born
as you Sophie founded it and these are
the original yeah yeah original first
six of the Comancheros
loyalty tell me about that how important
is loyalty to you extremely loyalty is a
whole essence of everything you're not
loyal I'm not loyal to you haven't got
anything over the years jock recruited a
loyal band of men all searching for
something in life
proud outlaws the one percenters who
chose to live on the fringe of
mainstream society
when did the club start to become armed
when did you choose weapons the cop was
always you know from the beginning see
you're a different era I wasn't 2014
guns were easy to get so guns were
always here JA crannies club like a
private army
he wrote the rules and drooled his
comment errors in paramilitary exercises
they learned to shoot fight and defend
this film from 1977 shows the
Comancheros of that time in all their
glory an intimidating armed force with
JA cross taking the title of Supreme
Commander
how do you describe well how do you
characterize someone like Jah cross I
think he's very uncompromising I think
he's ruthless
Lindsey Simpson is an author and
journalist she co-wrote brothers in arms
about the bikey war that was about to
unfold
he's taken over other gangs he managed
to get you know dominance and the bikee
scene but then the his very own men the
Comancheros split away and that was
devastating to jock by the early 1980s
jocks tough line was causing dissent in
the ranks of younger less disciplined
recruits jocks loyal wife Vanessa
noticed a change in the atmosphere what
did you say to jock I told him there's
something wrong with them I said they're
really acting weird and strange all of a
sudden
a year before mil para and to save his
club from splintering jock gave in to
his men and relocated the Comancheros
from its Western Sydney Clubhouse moving
closer to the city they found their new
base in a waterfront mansion on Sydney
Harbour that then though was the
beginning of the downfall that was the
beginning of the end beginning of the
end
yeah it is the most unlikely of places
for whitey quarters
it sure is I mean it's one of the best
pieces of real estate in Sydney really
when you look at it
[Applause]
[Music]
the gentrified piece of Louisa Road
Burch brothers was shattered with the
blast of own shaking Harley's rock bands
and wet t-shirt contests the young
Comancheros partied hard the old guard
hated the truth of it is this house is
jocks worst nightmare this is where he
lost control of his club I think the
other thing to say too is culturally it
was so different I mean he lost control
because the boys wanted the view and the
better lifestyle and wanted to get away
for the military drills so I think for
them that showed how much they've moved
away from job in a matter of weeks
jock announced he was splitting the club
the wild men could stay and form a city
chapter jock and his loyalists would
return to the more familiar surroundings
of suburban Western Sydney were you
comfortable at birch Grove no area on
place in hindsight that was a disaster
game to me it was and tell like the old
people it was we didn't fit
but this was much more than just about a
clubhouse and jock feeling out of place
this was about ego and personalities the
Birchgrove chapter would end up under
the command of Anthony Spencer who went
by the command chair own it name of
Snodgrass or snotty
tell me about snotty when he came along
what did you think of him
he was our last bloke who's our soul so
we took him in and it grew on you you
took him under your wing essentially
didn't pretty well that relationship
evolved into like a father-son
relationship Big Brother little brother
father and son where were we when he put
it but snotty would do the unthinkable
after a trip to the United States to buy
bike parts he returned with a bombshell
he'd secretly negotiated permission to
form an Australian chapter of the
Bandidos
he and his 30 men were forming a rival
gang the man who'd been like a son to
jock was now a traitor sorry come down
my driveway
killer job but quitting the clock we
handed Carlson
and we're all joining about needles
okay man Shuki son so pick the colors up
goodbye
I can't believe you took it bet how I'll
tell you a swear and my soul with these
so these were your men they've been
disloyal to you now
we don't wanna let cut all ties the
seeds of Mill Pyrrha had been sown
coming up
how did you get back move the Sheraton
no one could know that in just a few
months there was a long barrel firearm
Barbara's death would end in bloodshed
then it went off and it was on for young
and old that's meant on 60 minutes
the year is 1984 and Australia's most
violent bikie war is brewing leanne
walters is 15 years old and about to
become the innocent face of the milp era
massacre she's bought her dad a Father's
Day present and is on her way to see him
after she looks around the bike swap
meeting in the carpark of the Viking
tavern but Leanne never gets to see her
dad on Father's Day
she's gunned down in the battle between
the notorious Comancheros led by jock
Ross and the newly formed Bandidos led
by snotty Spencer it remains the world's
worst single outbreak of bikie violence
and as a result some images are
disturbing and viewer discretion is
advised
[Music]
Jah cross was a marked man he and snotty
once brothers-in-arms were now bitter
rivals there were threats bashing and an
apparent attempt on Jaques life when a
mysterious car knocked him off his bike
a spiral of violence that was getting
out of control then at night how did you
get back brother Sharapova's you ordered
that it was a consensus it's got to be
done so without being said without being
ordered yeah it was knowing that some
had to be done what message then were
you hoping to see the message was back
off
you pushed too far
but there was no backing off from either
side the fuse was lit
jocke have you been back to mill para
since that day in 1984 now what does
this place mean to you it's not happy
place is it the final showdown will come
at the Viking temple
Amil para pub that will forever be
etched in by key and criminal folklore
what do you think about what happened
here that night so many people died here
that day then
[Music]
you know you don't know how much you
miss a person when they're gone you
don't know
passing time has never dulled this
journey for Rex Walters he's come to be
with his daughter Lianne like he's done
on all the special occasions for 30
years
morning Lian I brought you some lovely
flowers you know April that's a birthday
and when that day comes around oi
chatter and you know it's a cold feeling
goes through me and I go through the
cemetery and have a few words through I
know it's you it may seem silly but it's
what every father would do
Lagaan was 15 and a refugee of her
parents divorce she lived with a
friend's family had a factory job and
dreamt of better times ahead coach
driver Rex saw LeAnn just a few days
before that Father's Day in 1984
LeAnn walked in and hello dad and give
me a big kiss and cuddle and she said
I'll be around on father's day to see us
that was the last time I seen her very
they're very last
[Music]
Rick says Leanne was a bit of a rebel
but the two remained close she shared
her dad's love of all things mechanical
and had a fascination with motorbikes
which puts Leanne in the crowds at the
Viking tavern like everyone else
Leanne's oblivious to what's about to
unfold it was meant to be a family day
it's like a market for motorcycle parts
and car parts Linda Martin was also
there that day she remembers naively
joking that she'd never ventured that
far from home a carefree 22 year old she
was enjoying a day out with her biker
boyfriend it was just a family day that
just happened to turn into hell Linda is
sitting in her car soaking up the
sunshine when a parade of Comancheros
bellow through the carpark
bristling with weapons
[Music]
the arrival of the Comancheros set the
scene there what was that like that was
like a cavalcade of them coming down the
carpark so they wanted to be noticed
they wanted everyone to know that they
were there it was a show of force
absolutely I saw them with
walkie-talkies not thought that was very
unusual and there was motorcycles with
guns scabbards over the handlebars
when you arrived that day when you
rumbled into this car park on your bike
what did you think was gonna happen
nothing at all no why did you come here
because a man won't come in here no
choice
Jacque insists that it was a late
decision to turn up at the swap meet and
that his men came to be seen but not to
finding armed to the hilt for the fence
not attacked so you're here if you
parked the bikes where did you go
well mill their own for a while no no
went along the back friends to see if it
was another way in or out
Jacque is still around the back of the
pub when at least 30 Bandidos pulling
the Comancheros are outnumbered and
caught by surprise
weapons are draw any chance that this is
just an exercise in chest-thumping
evaporates matter of seconds it's on
there was a long barrel firearm produced
being held straight up in the air and
people were saying put the gun down
let's fight like men and suddenly there
was all these men grabbing for the
firearm and it was still barrel up in
the air and then it went off and it was
like a starting pistol it was on for
young and old
once that gun is fired it's chaos it is
absolute chaos
there were shots coming from everywhere
there was people ducking for cover
people reaching into cars for firearms
it wasn't very long before the
windscreen of the car I was sitting in
got smashed by a bullet and I had bits
of lead pellet in my face and glass I
was covered in glass from the windscreen
like everyone else Linda's curries for
cover as gunfire sprays across the car
park
in the chaos it's unclear who is
shooting through the noise was
incredible it wasn't just the shots
which were coming from everywhere there
was people smashing each other with lead
pipes with baseball bats with chains
people screaming in agony it all
happened so quickly that you'd bleak and
suddenly there was three bodies on the
ground near the back of the car park
young Leanne Walters is caught by
surprise
she struck by a bullet from a Rossi
point 357 magnum rifle fired by the
bandidas the injuries to the lower face
are horrific and instantly failed the
dad said I know where you've heard the
news or not and I said well the only use
it I've heard is seven people including
a girl being killed at Mill Pyrrha and
he said yes he said that was LeeAnn that
was your girl yeah that's my girl there
were so many children there there was
people throwing their children over the
fence there was a pregnant woman lying
in the middle of the carpark with her
husband who was with me and he was
wanting to go and get her there were so
many people that were put in danger it
just made me very angry
dr. story goes that as you've got your
machete you've come through the carpark
yelling kill them all
nah bullshit crap never said that now
and sell what and say nothing
Jacque Ross storms across the car park
wielding his trademark machine just kept
it the same I just walked down okay I'm
across the first I knew I met I'll point
you to item this is what I'm talking
brought across my shoulder
he's just underneath he went he left I
gotta do more steps are gonna cut them
down this I'm go then I'll get hit and a
man we're going down remember getting
back up so it was me out
coming up courage under fire it's the
only weapon I had and I was going to
shoot me
and police rushing we're dead and dying
all around it and a terrifying standoff
son Sean was armed with a 12-gauge
shotgun that's next on 60 minutes
John Garvey saw an awful lot during his
25 years as a cop but nothing compares
to the carnage he confronted when
arriving at the Viking tavern carpark
the scene of the infamous milp era
massacre not only were there wounded and
dead everywhere the rival biker gangs
the Comancheros and the Bandidos were
still armed and locked in a standoff
what John would do next and the risks he
would take would be a beacon of bravery
on this dark day
[Music]
jock Ross has been shot in the head and
chest he's lying amid the carnage that
is the milp era massacre his men the
Comancheros are slugging it out with
bitter rivals the Bandidos in the
carpark of the Viking tavern in western
Syria trapped by the fighting Linda
Martin is here in the far corner of the
carpark sheltering behind a van
initial fear gives way to anger and
somehow she finds incredible bravery I
took my camera out and I thought I'm not
going to let them get away with this and
I crawled underneath the van and I
started taking photos I was trying to
capture people with firearms still in
their hands so that I could later say
that man shot that man with that weapon
[Music]
how did you have the presence of mind to
do that amidst all that chaos anger does
that to you I think it clears your mind
[Music]
detective Senior Constable John Garvey
was one of the first officers to rush to
the scene we were continually getting
updates at that time from the police
radio robbery shots had been fired we
got to some stage we got a message that
a person who'd gone berserk with a
firearm at the premises and it escalated
quickly didn't absolutely nothing on the
trip either nothing could have prepared
you for what we walked into dead and
dying all around us we had a police
helicopter above us there was a great
deal of confusion hundreds of people
milling around
[Music]
the two gangs still haven't surrendered
when John Garvey enters the biking
tavern to start moving people out
he's flying blind and in plain clothes
armed with a shotgun unfortunately not
knowing the layout of the hotel I walked
through the back door into the the back
of the car park and at that stage I
confronted fellow rhyming couplet some
Chinese who is known kommentera Raymond
Kirkland was armed with a 12-gauge
shotgun he'd seen his friends killed
weeds and his friends wounded that was
fairly tense I'm a cop put it down what
do you mean you're a cop what do you
study well
bicycle said you're not coming into here
that's thing you don't come in here with
a gun you put your own weapon down I did
I agree with him that if I put my weapon
down what he he surrender his he agreed
to do that that's an act of faith on
your behalf good fighter at that stage
or just simply wanted to take the
tension out of it but once once I put my
weapon down he did relax he did give me
his weapon and then I think the common
sense kicked in and that the only way we
were going to get people in there to
treat the wounded was to get the rest of
the weapons in an act that would earn
him a commendation for bravery
John Garvey convinces sunshine to lead
him into the car park with no gun hand
stretched out to disarm the by keys and
collect their weapons taking in the
carnage he counts seven dead four
Comancheros two Bandidos end innocent
bystander leanne walters what are your
thoughts of the young girl who was
killed here caught in the crossfire Lee
Anne so tragedy for her so young do know
the tragedy but I get the sense you
don't have any remorse about actually
fighting the Bandidos you you're not
sorry about actually using weapons
fighting attacking them on that day fact
us we defended but you had the choice
not they had the choice we were there
they commenced there had the choice
but you also had the choice now no
charge no we don't have a choice do you
mean how can you not fight them now
coming at you we're gonna do throw your
arms up and get cut to bits you got a
number
I was marked to die it was a closest
thing I've ever seen to a battlefield I
know that's used a lot but really there
was dead bodies it was walking wounded
there was ambos there was cartridge
cases baseball bats guns Mick McGann is
still haunted by father's day 1984 no
level of training could prepare the
detective Senior Constable for what he
found in the carpark of the Viking tenem
the magnitude of the thing got to me
I've never been to a massacre is it
remarkable then that more people didn't
die oh yeah oh it was I've always said
that it was said that a Clairborne
Society and they came there another side
of a war and stuff everybody else in
addition to the deaths 21 by keys were
injured many seriously as Joc underwent
surgery to remove shotgun pellets from
his brain
police wasted no time operation hard
walk was given full authority to raid
homes and start making arrests
I mean this is an incredible array of
information this is the history of the
world Peru massacres now this table
holds just a fraction of the evidence
gathered by police this is the flyer for
the actual day on Father's Day on Sunday
2nd of September 1984 much of this has
remained confidential for 30 years some
of the photos case notes and witness
statements collected by John Garvey and
Mick McGann a short time later the
Bandidos have arrived and shown by the
motor bikes here and there
who barely slept from the moment the
last shots were fired to rounding up the
suspects so it was just a massive brief
and and and really resulted in just a
massive logistics exercising when you
look at all of this I mean what stands
out to both of you about exactly what
happened on that day the thing that
stands out to me was that there are some
photographs here that were taken by a
young girl these are the photos
absolutely and what Linda Moulton
captured tells the story oh my word I
just find those photographs remarkable
Linda's courage held long enough to take
seven photos
the only frames that exist of the actual
shooter her photos and witness evidence
were crucial for the police of trial
they placed guns in the hands of by keys
and revealed who was where in the car
fuck I think it's still remarkable that
you have the presence of mind to grab
your camera whilst all those weapons are
being fired hide under this van and and
capture this Massacre which is seared
into Australian history it's the only
weapon I had and I was going to shoot
back and you did I did the Flinders
bravery would come at a price coming up
making gestures like that decades of
death rates I was receiving phone calls
saying that I would be dead
a father clings to precious memories but
that's all I've got left under here and
finally a hint of remorse went cold
that's next on 60 minutes Linda Martin
is in the wrong place at the wrong time
one of the many innocent bystanders
caught in the middle of the horrific
Mill para massacre on Father's Day 1984
but in that moment of madness Linda
finds extraordinary courage to take
seven detailed and damning photos those
photos would be crucial in helping
detectives round up and convict the
culprits Linda would have to testify in
court and because of that she's been
forced to maintain her courage for a
very long time how hard was it to go to
court and identify these biking's to
stand up in front of them it was very
difficult they were behind a perspex
screen but there were so many of them
and they're all making gestures like
that they were slit your throat slitting
the throat we I was receiving phone
calls threatening phone call saying that
if I testified that I would be dead did
you ever think about keeping him mouth
shut not giving evidence no no I was in
that court for a reason because I was
not going to let them get away with what
they did by the time the defendants
arrived in to prison vans about 80
police had completely surrounded the
courthouse each of the bye keys was
charged with seven counts of murder a
staggering three hundred and one charges
in all
the scale of the trial was extraordinary
and remains Australia's longest at 13
months inside the courtroom had been
specially refurbished to accommodate 21
defense lawyers and six prosecutors in
the end 30 of the bye keys were jailed
but Bandidos boss Anthony Snoddy Spencer
didn't wait for a verdict he took his
life in prison all murder convictions
would later be reduced to manslaughter
Jacques would serve five years and three
months why did the mill parent massacre
happen what do you put it down I think
the significant feature in all of this
is William Ross Jacque Ross I believe
he's a very intelligent very calculating
very dominant figure and is responsible
for all of those things that occurred
that day is he responsible for the seven
people who died out there I believe so
should he have blood on his hands today
I believe sat in jail Jacques Ross
remained president of the Comancheros
and kept fellow jailed Club members in
line he was a model prisoner whose good
behavior saw the reduced sentence
his daughter Holly was just a toddler
when dad went away I remember that we
would be there a lot you know I know
that we went there every other day that
we weren't in court we were there on
weekends I mean I don't remember it
being a jail and that's not what I knew
it is what did you think of course this
is castle dad's castle castle yeah your
dad carries a fierce reputation how do
you defend him I see him as a person of
strength very loyal he will never leave
your side
[Music]
Jacque why is this place so special for
you over there that's what all the men
are bidding this year I was going to the
club
if there's a place for JA cross to
reflect 30 years on it's here at the
Palmdale Cemetery and the Comancheros
Morial foghorn yeah Leroy yeah sparrow
and dog yeah they were all there that
was mill para that was my para there was
a little old heart to the club you know
when you stand here now and you you look
down at their names what do you think
how do you reflect on it
sad you know you you really will give in
to be with them
[Music]
the legacy for Linda Martin has been a
lifetime of threats forcing her to move
and change jobs a number of times only
now after 30 years does she feel able to
break her silence do you feel as if over
the years you've lived and looking over
your shoulder I did for a long while how
long did it take before you you stopped
doing that before you got rid of that
fear I'd say 25 years 25 years you have
received death threats for such a long
time now you'd be forgiven completely
for not talking at all why are you
talking on this anniversary I think it's
important to remember the innocent
people that were out there it was a
family day and I think the victims have
been lost in it
now right this is your gift that was me
gift yes if the Rideau that goes by when
you don't think of Leanne now it's every
day I do me mind it's locked in now and
that's it
the Jane's Rex Walters clings to
cherished memories the Father's Day gift
that LeeAnn never had the chance to give
him and the clothes she was wearing on
the day she died
you know people might think more why do
you keep them but it's just I can
imagine what she looked like on that day
yeah but that's all I've got left over
you know I can see an hour she probably
be smart smiling at me for doing this
for her she would be might because you
were honoring her memory yes
[Music]
four members of the biker gang were
waiting for the chief common chair oh
when he walked free at nine o'clock this
morning on his release Jah cross
remained a formidable figure leading the
Comancheros until his retirement in 2003
it's hard to imagine given his notoriety
but jock is not unlike any other retired
71 year old grandfather how do you
describe yourself today oh man these
days his life is dominated by a
different Club with different colors for
the past 20 years he served as a
decorated Rural Fire Service captain
but mil terra remains the defining event
of his life to this day what happened in
that car park remains the worst single
outbreak of bikie violence the world has
ever seen a war between men who wouldn't
back down Jacque 30 years on what
responsibilities will blame do you wear
for the mill para massacre
if it could be change I change it but
what was it all over nothing really at
the end of the day prayed ego possibly
how did you feel about revisiting that
car park in mill para strange I was all
right actually when I was air talking to
you it's probably a copper night my
daughter for Mia says whenever went cold
for no reason I just went cold
I think that's the first I've heard you
express that sort of emotion about what
happened that day
my aim is that regret possible sadness I
don't know happened